- When I went to school, there were two camps: people who believed that they get maths and people who don’t. I was always a sceptic of this segmentation. There were people who believed that they were good at maths, and also got good grades, but also the polar opposite. This seems to serve as weak evidence, that there is a distinction between people who get maths and people who don’t. Moreover, that people usually are good at predicting where they lie on the spectrum.
- The first question that comes to mind is: do they first believe that they are good at maths and **then**  get good grades? Or do children first get good grades and accept the premise that they are simply good at maths?
- The scientific evidence seems pretty clear on whether personal beliefs about academic achievements influences grade performance: [Skinner 1990](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/What-It-Takes-to-Do-Well-in-School-and-Whether-I've-Skinner-Wellborn/c4b9431dfeeefa09ad213f6786399b122e9b3127) found that children who believe they can produce the responses that lead to desired outcomes perform better academically. [Morrison 1979](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Personal-Beliefs%2C-Information-Availability%2C-and-of-Morrison-Morrison/ad3cbfddc52942ad0431f1ceb0875804aa8ceeba) found that students with high self-esteem predicted higher grades compared to their prior grade average in the course. But these studies don’t make statements about the causal direction. Do personal beliefs about academic achievements influence grade performance or vice versa?
- Why does this matter? If good grades lead to higher self-esteem about academic achievements, then we shouldn’t work on improving academic self-esteem. On the other hand, if improving academic self-esteem improves grade performance, a student who believes that they get maths might get better grades. Changing how you perceive your performance will increase your grade performance.
- [Mason 1989](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/The-Stability-of-Students'-Achievement-Related-and-Mason-Stipek/ce25dee9d54d7520fb8323e1e4f98c3b441165a4) seems to suggest that the relation is bidirectional. If you get good grades, you will make it easy to believe you are good at school or maths. This will make it easier for you to motivate yourself to study, etc., which will help you in getting good grades. So, one point of improvement could be to increase your academic self-esteem. This won’t do the whole job, but part of it and leads to positive feedback loops.
- To come back to the opening topic: this seems to give an answer to the knockout argument, that people don’t get maths. You plausibly can get maths, but perceiving yourself as somebody who isn’t good with numbers isn’t helping. You can achieve better results by better beliefs.
- Now, there are edge-cases. Students who get bad grades, despite putting in the effort, but perceive themselves as people who get maths. Students who get good grades, but perceive themselves as people who don’t get maths. This might be due to an extra variable. The first group might get better grades if they weren’t perfectionists about getting maths. Getting good grades isn’t necessarily a matter of understanding, but also of gaming the system. I wouldn’t go as far as saying that you have to cheat or lie. I mean that [you can literally optimize for getting a good grade as a proxy for understanding something and fail at understanding](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Goodhart%27s_law). As long as exams don’t test understanding, this is a possible and easier way. Similarly, students who get good grades, but believe they don’t get maths, do so righteously. They simply do what they are told. Calculate the determinant? Okay, done. What does it mean? Don’t know.
- To conclude this section, the initially mentioned camps exist. People who don’t get maths, and people who get maths. But they are way smaller than they seem to be by what people say. Much more people could understand maths if they adapt a [different mindset](https://www.ted.com/talks/carol_dweck_the_power_of_believing_that_you_can_improve). Similarly, people who get good grades don’t necessarily understand maths. The segmentation has to look more like this:
  <!-- notionvc: 6c5c4708-4b0b-4b98-9032-3de85db96aa5 -->